Long queues outside CNG (compressed natural gas) filling stations are a common enough sight in Delhi, Mumbai, and other metros. But there has been a significant change in recent years, and it has almost gone unnoticed. The vehicles waiting patiently at these pumps aren’t limited to autorickshaws or taxis anymore; there’s a sizeable chunk of private passenger vehicles as well.

Introduced in the late 1990s after the Supreme Court asked the Delhi government to find an alternative to petrol and diesel to control the choking air pollution, CNG has taken a while to gain popularity. Since it was friendly on the pocket, by the early 2000s, automakers started retrofitting CNG cylinders in the boots of diesel and petrol cars. But it still wouldn’t take off.

“There was only a limited amount of fuelling infrastructure that was available throughout the country, and you could obviously see huge lines of cars that used to gather around a CNG station to get the CNG refilled. An improvement in the infrastructure over time has aided the popularity of the powertrain,” says Rohan Kanwar Gupta, Vice President, Corporate Ratings at ratings agency ICRA.

 
In 2010, India’s biggest carmaker, Maruti Suzuki India Limited, took the plunge and introduced CNG in its entry-level Alto model, becoming the first domestic automobile manufacturer to introduce the CNG powertrain. As the infrastructure developed along with tighter emission norms, CNG started to find its footing in the burgeoning automotive industry.

R.C. Bhargava
 
“We were the first to start the production of CNG cars because they were more economical than petrol cars and environmentally cleaner. They suited users with limited incomes”
-R.C. Bhargava,Chairman, Maruti Suzuki India Limited
Even so, CNG car sales languished between 2% and 4%, rising to a modest 6.6% in 2019. But then Covid-19 appears to have changed everything. Low operating costs of CNG vehicles lured customers as petrol and diesel prices soared because of supply disruptions after the Covid-induced lockdowns. A slight increase in fuelling stations helped, even as the shortage of charging infrastructure and higher upfront costs proved a roadblock for electric vehicles (EVs).

As a result, CNG car sales have shot through the roof. Per the government’s VAHAN database, 598,152 CNG cars were sold in FY24, a near 40% increase over the previous year. That momentum continued into Q1FY25 as CNG cars’ market share beat that of diesel for the first time at 18.3%, compared with 18% for the latter, according to the UK-headquartered data and analytics firm JATO Dynamics. And where demand has gone, supply has followed. The number of car models that are offering CNG variants has almost doubled between June 2022 and June 2024 from 13 to 24, per JATO Dynamics. Such has been the interest that a CNG-powered motorbike has also been launched.

But for CNG’s march to continue, many challenges need to be addressed, not least the limited CNG infrastructure. Plus, there’s the potential threat from EVs.


For some automobile manufacturers, CNG has become the second-largest by sales volume in their portfolio after petrol. At Maruti Suzuki, which phased out diesel vehicles in 2019, the CNG portfolio is the second-largest segment after petrol by sales. The company aims to equalise its diesel market share with CNG and hybrid models even as the company plans to introduce electric vehicles by 2025. Notably, the sales of the company’s hybrids have remained lower than those of CNG.

For Tata Motors, the CNG portfolio raced ahead of its EV portfolio in Q1FY25. Its EV penetration remained steady at 12%. However, CNG penetration increased from 16% in FY24 to 22% in Q1FY25. “We expect to continue to build on these as new launches come through. So we’re quite happy with the CNG portfolio’s performance; it was also good from a profitability perspective,” says P.B. Balaji, Group CFO of Tata Motors.

As CNG adoption increases, original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) such as Maruti Suzuki, Tata Motors, and Hyundai are introducing more refined models as the technology improves.

“A lack of availability of the powertrain across popular models had also constrained volumes. OEMs were offering select models, which were largely present in the segment. Over time, the technology has gotten more refined, and OEMs have proceeded to launch more CNG variants,” notes ICRA’s Gupta.


For example, Maruti Suzuki forayed into the CNG segment with single-cylinder technology. Going ahead, the automobile manufacturer is working on an integrated design. R.C. Bhargava, Maruti Suzuki’s Chairman, says, “We were the first to start the production of CNG cars because they were more economical than petrol cars as well as environmentally cleaner. They suited users with limited incomes and also met environmental objectives. With the government giving high priority to building infrastructure for CNG distribution, the sale of CNG cars has been rising, and we expect to sell about 600,000 such cars this year.”

He believes that customers should be encouraged to buy cars that use strong hybrid technology, or CNG or ethanol and biogas, while the use of electric cars increases, and pure petrol and diesel car use should be minimised. “CNG cars are not as clean as hybrids but are better than petrol or diesel cars and also do not use oil,” he says. Maruti is the leader in the segment by quite a distance. In FY24, it accounted for a whopping 73% or about 173,000 of the 236,000 CNG cars sold, followed at a very distant second by Tata Motors at 15%. Maruti currently has 17 variants in its line-up.

Tata Motors stepped up its CNG game in 2022 by introducing advanced iCNG technology, which is currently offered in its entry-level cars. It was the first to introduce twin-cylinder technology and AMT (automated manual transmission) in the CNG segment.

Vinay Pant, Head of Marketing at Tata Motors Passenger Vehicles Ltd, says the introduction of twin-cylinder technology was a game changer. “This innovation not only enhanced the appeal of our vehicles but also attracted a broader spectrum of customers, including young buyers who value both cost efficiency and advanced features. We have expanded our product range to include CNG options across mid- to high-level variants,” says Pant.